Book 1
General Part
Division 1
Persons
Title 1
Natural persons, consumers, entrepreneurs
Section 1
Beginning of legal capacity
The legal capacity of a human being begins on the completion of birth.
Section 2
Beginning of majority
Majority begins at the age of eighteen.
Sections 3 – 6
(repealed)
Section 7
Residence; establishment and termination
(1) A person who settles permanently in a place establishes his residence in that place.
(2) There may be a residence in more than one place at the same time.
(3) Residence is terminated if the person abandons the place of residence with the intention
of giving it up.
Section 8
Residence of persons who lack full capacity to contract
Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice and Consumer Protection
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze-im-internet.de
Page 3 of 438
(1) A person who is not capable of contracting or who has limited capacity to contract can
neither establish nor terminate residence without the consent of his legal representative.
(2) A minor who is or has been married may independently establish and terminate
residence.
Section 9
Residence of a soldier
(1) A soldier has his residence in his garrison. The residence of a soldier who has no
garrison within the country is deemed to be his last garrison within the country.
(2) These provisions do not apply to soldiers who are merely doing compulsory military
service or who cannot independently establish residence.
Section 10
(repealed)
Section 11
Residence of a child
A minor child shares the residence of its parents; it does not share the residence of a parent
who lacks the right to care for the person of the child. If neither parent has the right to care
for the person of the child, the child shares the residence of the person who has this right.
The child retains the residence until it validly abandons it.
Section 12
Right to a name
If the right of a person to use a name is disputed by another person, or if the interest of the
person entitled to the name is injured by the unauthorised use of the same name by another
person, the person entitled may require the other to remove the infringement. If further
infringements are to be feared, the person entitled may seek a prohibitory injunction.
Section 13
Consumer*)
A consumer means every natural person who enters into a legal transaction for purposes
that predominantly are outside his trade, business or profession.
*) Official note: These provisions serve to implement the directives set out above under numbers 3, 4, 6, 7, 9 and 11.
Section 14
Entrepreneur*)
(1) An entrepreneur means a natural or legal person or a partnership with legal personality
who or which, when entering into a legal transaction, acts in exercise of his or its trade,
business or profession.
(2) A partnership with legal personality is a partnership that has the capacity to acquire rights
and to incur liabilities.
*) Official note: These provisions serve to implement the directives set out above under numbers 3, 4, 6, 7, 9 and 11.
Sections 15 - 20
(repealed)
Title 2
Legal persons
Subtitle 1
Associations
Chapter 1
General provisions
Section 21
Non-commercial association
Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice and Consumer Protection
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze-im-internet.de
Page 4 of 438
An association whose object is not commercial business operations acquires legal
personality by entry in the register of associations of the competent local court [Amtsgericht].
Section 22
Commercial association
An association whose object is commercial business operations acquires legal personality,
for lack of special provisions under federal law, by state grant. The grant is in the power of
the Land in whose territory the association has its seat.
Section 23
(repealed)
Section 24
Seat
The seat of an association, unless otherwise provided, is the place where the management
is conducted.
Section 25
Constitution
The constitution of an association with legal personality is, to the extent that it is not based
on the following provisions, determined by the articles of association.
Section 26
Board and representation
(1) An association must have a board. The board represents the association in court and out
of court; it has the status of a legal representative. The extent of the power of agency may be
restricted by the articles of association with effect against third parties.
(2) If the board consists of several persons, the association is represented by the majority of
the board members. If a declaration of intent is to be submitted to an association, it is
sufficient to submit it to one member of the board.
Section 27
Appointment of and management by the board
(1) The appointment of the board is by resolution of the general meeting.
(2) The appointment is revocable at any time, notwithstanding the claim to payment in
conformity with contract. The revocability may be restricted by the articles of association to
the case where there is a compelling reason for the revocation; such a reason includes
without limitation a gross breach of duty or inability to effect proper management.
(3) The management by the board is governed by the provisions on mandate in sections 664
to 670 with the necessary modifications.
Section 28
Passing of resolutions by the board
In case of a board consisting of more than one person, resolutions are passed under the
provisions of sections 32 and 34, which govern the resolutions of the members of the
association.
Section 29
Emergency appointment by local court [Amtsgericht]
To the extent that the board is lacking the necessary members, they are to be appointed, in
urgent cases, for the period until the defect is corrected, on the application of a person
concerned, by the local court [Amtsgericht] that keeps the register of associations for the
district in which the association has its seat.
Section 30
Special representatives
Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice and Consumer Protection
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze-im-internet.de
Page 5 of 438
It may be provided by the articles of association that, in addition to the board, special
representatives are to be appointed for particular transactions. In case of doubt, the power of
agency of such a representative extends to all legal transactions that the sphere of business
allocated to him normally entails.
Section 31
Liability of an association for organs
The association is liable for the damage to a third party that the board, a member of the
board or another constitutionally appointed representative causes through an act committed
by it or him in carrying out the business with which it or he is entrusted, where the act gives
rise to a liability in damages.
Section 31a
Liability of members of executive bodies and special representatives
(1) If members of executive bodies or special representatives act free of charge, or if they
receive remuneration for their activity which does not exceed 720 euros per year, they are
liable towards the association for damage caused in performing their duties only in case of
intent or gross negligence. Sentence 1 also applies to liability towards the members of the
association. If there is a dispute as to whether a member of an executive body or a special
representative has caused damage with intent or gross negligence, the burden of proof is
incumbent on the association or on the member of the association.
(2) If members of executive bodies or special representatives are obliged under
subsection (1) sentence 1 to provide to another party compensation for damage which they
caused in performing their duties, they may demand from the association to be released
from the obligation. Sentence 1 does not apply if the damage was caused with intent or
gross negligence.
Section 31b
Liability of members of the association
(1) If members of the association act for the association free of charge, or if they receive
remuneration for their activity which does not exceed 720 euros per year, they are liable to
provide to the association compensation for damage caused in performing the duties of the
association, in accordance with the articles of association, that have been assigned to them,
only in case of intent or gross negligence. Section 31a (1) sentence 3 applies with the
necessary modifications.
(2) If members of the association are obliged under subsection (1) sentence 1 to provide to
another party compensation for damage which they caused in performing the duties of the
association, in accordance with the articles of association, that have been assigned to them,
they may require the association to release them from the obligation. Sentence 1 does not
apply if the members of the association have caused the damage with intent or gross
negligence.
Section 32
General meeting; passing of resolutions
(1) The affairs of the association, to the extent that they are not to be attended to by the
board or another organ of the association, are dealt with by resolution in a meeting of the
members. In order for the resolution to be valid, it is necessary for the subject to be stated
when the meeting is convened. The resolution is decided by the majority of the votes cast.
(2) Even without a meeting of the members, a resolution is valid if all members declare their
approval of the resolution in writing.
Section 33
Amendment of articles of association
(1) A resolution containing an amendment of the articles of association must have a majority
of three quarters of the votes cast. In order to alter the objects of the association, the
Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice and Consumer Protection
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze-im-internet.de
Page 6 of 438
approval of all members is necessary; the approval of the members not present must be
declared in writing.
(2) If the legal personality of the association results from a grant, the consent of the
competent authority is necessary for every amendment of the articles of association.
Section 34
Exclusion from voting
A member has no right to vote if the resolution concerns entering into a legal transaction with
him or commencing or disposing of litigation between him and the association.
Section 35
Special rights
Special rights of a member may not be adversely affected by a resolution of the general
meeting without his approval.
Section 36
Convening of the general meeting
(1) The general meeting is to be convened in the cases laid down in the articles of
association and when the interests of the association require it.
Section 37
Convening a meeting at the request of a minority
(1) The general meeting is to be convened if the proportion of the membership laid down in
the articles of association or, in the absence of a provision, one-tenth of the members call in
writing for a meeting to be convened, stating the purpose and the reasons.
(2) If the request is not granted, the local court [Amtsgericht] may authorise the members
who made the request to convene the meeting; it may make orders on the conduct of the
chairmanship at the meeting. The court with jurisdiction is the local court [Amtsgericht] that
keeps the register of associations for the district in which the association has its seat. The
authorisation must be referred to in the notice convening the meeting.
Section 38
Membership
Membership is not transferable and not inheritable. The exercise of membership rights
cannot be entrusted to another person.
Section 39
Leaving the association
(1) The members have the right to leave the association.
(2) The articles of association may specify that leaving is admissible only at the end of a
business year or only after a notice period; the maximum notice period is two years.
Section 40
Flexible provisions
The provisions of section 26 (2) sentence 1, section 27 (1) and (3), sections 28 and 31a (1)
sentence 2, as well as sections 32, 33 and 38, do not apply where otherwise provided by the
articles of association. It is not possible to derogate from section 34 through the articles of
association, even for the passing of resolutions by the board.
Section 41
Dissolution of the association
An association may be dissolved by resolution of the general meeting. The resolution must
have a majority of three-quarters of the votes cast, unless otherwise provided in the articles
of association.
Section 42
Insolvency
Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice and Consumer Protection
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze-im-internet.de
Page 7 of 438
(1) An association is dissolved by the commencement of insolvency proceedings and on the
order becoming legally final by means of which the commencement of the insolvency
proceedings has been rejected for insufficiency of assets. If the proceedings are
discontinued on the application of the debtor or terminated after the confirmation of an
insolvency plan that provides for the association to continue in existence, the general
meeting may pass a resolution that the association is to continue in existence. The articles of
association may provide that, if insolvency proceedings are commenced, the association is
to continue as an association without legal personality; in this case too, if the requirements of
sentence two above are satisfied, a resolution may be passed to continue the association as
an association with legal personality.
(2) If an association is insolvent or is overindebted, the board must petition for the
commencement of insolvency proceedings. If there is delay in petitioning, the members of
the board who are at fault are responsible to the creditors for the damage resulting from this;
they are liable as joint and several debtors.
Section 43
Deprivation of legal personality
An association whose legal personality is the result of a grant can be deprived of its legal
personality if it pursues objects different from those in the articles of association.
Section 44
Jurisdiction and proceedings
Jurisdiction and the procedure for the deprivation of legal personality under section 43 are
decided under the law of the Land in which the association has its seat.
*) Under Article 129 of the Basic Law [Grundgesetz], the Federal Minister of the Interior [Bundesminister des Innern] is now
competent.
Section 45
Devolution of the assets of the association
(1) On the dissolution of the association or its deprivation of legal personality, the assets
devolve on the persons specified in the articles of association.
(2) The articles of association may provide that the persons entitled to receive the assets are
specified by a resolution of the general meeting or by another organ of the association. If the
objects of the association are not commercial business operations, the general meeting may,
even without such a provision, allocate the assets to a public foundation or institution.
(3) If no persons entitled are specified, then if according to its articles the association
exclusively served the interests of its members, the assets pass in equal shares to the
members at the date of the dissolution or the deprivation of legal personality, and failing this
to the treasury of the Land in whose territory the association had its seat.
Section 46
Devolution on the treasury
If the assets of the association devolve on the treasury, the provisions on an inheritance that
devolves on the treasury as the heir on intestacy apply with the necessary modifications. The
treasury shall if possible use the assets in a manner corresponding to the objects of the
association.
Section 47
Liquidation
If the assets of the association do not devolve on the treasury, there must be a liquidation,
unless insolvency proceedings have commenced with regard to the assets of the
association.
Section 48
Liquidators
Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice and Consumer Protection
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze-im-internet.de
Page 8 of 438
(1) The liquidation is effected by the board. Other persons may also be appointed as
liquidators; the appointment is governed by the provisions for the appointment of the board.
(2) The liquidators have the legal status of the board, unless the purpose of the liquidation
leads to a different conclusion.
(3) If there are several liquidators, they are only empowered to represent jointly, and can
only enact orders unanimously, unless provided otherwise.
Section 49
Duties of the liquidators
(1) The liquidators must complete the current business, collect the receivables, convert the
rest of the assets into cash, satisfy the creditors and pay out the surplus to those entitled to
receive it. In order to complete transactions that are in progress, the liquidators may also
enter into new transactions. The collection of receivables and the conversion of the rest of
the assets into cash may be omitted to the extent that these measures are not necessary to
satisfy the creditors or to distribute the surplus among those entitled to receive it.
(2) The association is deemed to continue in existence until the end of the liquidation if the
purpose of the liquidation requires this.
Section 50
Public notice of the association in liquidation
(1) The dissolution of the association or its deprivation of legal personality must be
announced by the liquidators in a public notice. In the notice, the creditors must be
requested to register their claims. The public notice is made through the newspaper
specified in the articles of association for this purpose. Public notice is deemed to have been
made at the end of the second day after the publication or first publication.
(2) Known creditors must be requested by special invitation to register their claims.
Section 50a
Newspaper for notices
If an association has not specified a newspaper in the articles of association, or if the
newspaper specified for notices has ceased publication, notices of the association must be
published in the newspaper that is specified for public notices of the local court [Amtsgericht]
in whose district the association has its seat.
Section 51
One-year waiting period
The property may not be paid out to the persons entitled to receive it until a year has passed
after the announcement by public notice of the dissolution of the association or the
deprivation of legal personality.
Section 52
Security for creditors
(1) If a known creditor does not register his claim, the amount owed, if the right to deposit
exists, must be deposited for the creditor.
(2) If the discharge of an obligation is not possible at the time, or if an obligation is disputed,
the property may be distributed to the persons entitled to receive it only if security is provided
to the creditor.
Section 53
Liability in damages of the liquidators
Liquidators who commit breaches of their duties under section 42 (2) and sections 50, 51
and 52 or who, before the satisfaction of the creditors, distribute assets to the persons
entitled to receive are, if they are at fault, responsible to the creditors for the damage
resulting from this; they are liable as joint and several debtors.
Section 54
Associations without legal personality
Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice and Consumer Protection
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze-im-internet.de
Page 9 of 438
Associations without legal personality are governed by the provisions on partnership. When
a transaction is entered into with a third party in the name of such an association, the person
acting is personally liable; if more than one person acts, they are liable as joint and several
debtors.
Chapter 2
Registered associations
Section 55
Jurisdiction over entry in the register
The entry of an association of the kind specified in section 21 above in the register of
associations must be made at the local court [Amtsgericht] for the district in which the
association has its seat.
Section 55a
Electronic register of associations
(1) The Land governments may provide by statutory order that and to what extent the
register of associations is maintained in electronic form as a computerised data file. It must
be guaranteed that
1. the principles of proper data processing are observed, in particular that
precautions against a loss of data are taken, the necessary copies of the databases are
kept current at least on a daily basis and the original databases and copies of them are
kept in safe custody.
2. the entries to be made are immediately entered into a memory and it remains
permanently possible to reproduce their contents unchanged in readable form.
3. the measures required by the schedule to section 126 (1) sentence 2 no. 3 of
the Land Register Code [Grundbuchordnung] are taken.
The Land governments may by statutory order transfer the authorisation under sentence 1 to
the Land justice administration authorities.
(2) The electronic register of associations takes the place of one page of the previous
register as soon as the entries on this page have been entered in the memory intended for
the entries in the register of associations and made available as the register of associations.
A note of closure must be added to the corresponding pages of the previous register of
associations.
(3) An entry comes into effect as soon as it is entered in the memory intended for the register
entries and its contents can be permanently reproduced unchanged and in readable form.
There must be a verification, by a confirmation message or in another appropriate way, that
these requirements are satisfied. Each entry should show the date on which it came into
effect.
Section 56
Minimum number of members of the association
The entry in the register should be made only if the number of members is at least seven.
Section 57
Minimum requirements of the articles of association
(1) The articles of association must contain the objects, the name and the seat of the
association and indicate that the association is to be registered.
(2) The name should differ appreciably from the names of the registered associations in
existence in the same place or in the same municipality.
Section 58
Recommended contents of the articles of association
The articles of association should contain provisions:
Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice and Consumer Protection
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze-im-internet.de
Page 10 of 438
1. on becoming a member of the association and leaving it,
2. on whether the members are to make contributions, and if so, in what amount,
3. on the composition of the board,
4. on the conditions under which the general meeting is to be convened, on the
form of the convening and on the notarial recording of the resolutions.
Section 59
Application for registration
(1) The board must apply for the association to be registered.
(2) Copies of the articles of association and of the documents on the appointment of the
board must be attached to the application.
(3) The articles of association should be signed by at least seven members and should state
the date of their execution.
Section 60
Rejection of the application
If the requirements of sections 56 to 59 above have not been met, the application must be
rejected by the local court [Amtsgericht], stating the reasons.
Sections 61 - 63
(repealed)
Section 64
Contents of the entry in the register of associations
On entry in the register, the name and seat of the association, the date of the execution of
the articles, the members of the board and their powers of representation are to be stated.
Section 65
Addition to name
When the association is entered in the register, the name of the association is given the
additional element “eingetragener Verein” [“registered association”].
Section 66
Public notice of the entry and safekeeping of documents
(1) The local court [Amtsgericht] must publish the entry of the association in the register of
associations by means of publication in the electronic information and communication
system designated by the Land justice administration authority.
(2) The documents submitted with the application are kept by the local court [Amtsgericht].
Section 67
Changes to the board
(1) Every change to the board must be notified by the board for registration. A copy of the
document about the change is to be attached to the notification.
(2) Board members appointed by the court are entered in the register by the court at its own
motion.
Section 68
Protection of public confidence by the register of associations
If a transaction is entered into between the previous members of the board and a third party,
the change of the board can be used as a defence against the third party only if at the time
when the legal transaction is entered into the change has been recorded in the register of
associations or is known to the third party. If the change has been entered, the third party
need not allow it to apply against him if he does not know of it and his lack of knowledge
does not result from negligence.
Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice and Consumer Protection
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze-im-internet.de
Page 11 of 438
Section 69
Evidence of composition of the board
Evidence that the board consists of the persons entered in the register is furnished to public
authorities in the form of a local court [Amtsgericht] certificate confirming the entry.
Section 70
Protection of public confidence in case of entries on power of agency; passing
resolutions
The provisions of section 68 above also apply to provisions that restrict the scope of the
power of agency of the board or that lay down different arrangements for the power of
agency of the board than the provision in section 26 (2) sentence 1 above.
Section 71
Amendments of the articles of association
(1) Amendments of the articles of association are effective only when entered in the register
of associations. The board must make notification of the amendment for entry in the register.
A copy of the order containing the amendment and of the wording of the articles of
association is to be enclosed with the registration. In the wording of the articles of
association, the amended provisions must agree with the order on the amendment of the
articles of association, unchanged provisions must agree with the most recently submitted
full wording of the articles of association and, if the articles of association have been
amended without the full wording of the articles of association being submitted, must also
agree with the previously-entered amendments.
(2) The provisions of sections 60, 64 and section 66 (2) apply with the necessary
modifications.
Section 72
Certificate on number of members
At the request of the local court [Amtsgericht] at any time, the board shall file a written
confirmation on the number of members of the association.
Section 73
Decrease in numbers of members
If the number of members of the association falls below three, the local court [Amtsgericht]
shall, on an application by the board and, if the application is not made within three months,
of its own motion, after hearing the board, deprive the association of legal personality.
Section 74
Dissolution
(1) The dissolution of the association and the deprivation of legal personality must be
entered in the register of associations.
(2) If the association is dissolved by resolution of the general meeting or by the expiry of the
time determined for the duration of the association, the board must notify the dissolution to
be registered. In the former case, a copy of the resolution for dissolution must be attached to
the notification.
(3) (repealed)
Section 75
Entries in the case of insolvency
The commencement of insolvency proceedings and the order finally rejecting the
commencement of the insolvency proceedings for insufficiency of assets, as well as the
dissolution of the association pursuant to section 42 (2) sentence 1, are to be registered by
the court of its own motion. The following are also to be entered of its own motion
1. the reversal of the order commencing the insolvency proceedings,
Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice and Consumer Protection
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze-im-internet.de
Page 12 of 438
2. the appointment of a provisional insolvency administrator, if in addition the
debtor is generally enjoined from transferring assets or it is ordered that disposals by the
debtor are effective only with the approval of the provisional administrator in insolvency
proceedings, and the termination of such a protective measure,
3. an order of self-management by the debtor and the reversal of this order, and
an order that specific legal transactions of the debtor require approval,
4. the discontinuance and termination of the proceedings and
5. the monitoring of compliance with an insolvency plan and the termination of the
monitoring.
(2) If the association is continued by order of the general meeting pursuant to section 42 (1)
sentence 2, the board must register the continuation for an entry. A copy of the order is to be
enclosed with the registration.
Section 76
Entry in case of liquidation
(1) In case of the liquidation of the association, the liquidators and their power of agency
must be entered in the register of associations. The same applies to the termination of the
association subsequent to liquidation.
(2) The notification of the liquidators for registration must be made by the board. The
notification for registration must state the extent of the power of agency of the liquidators.
Changes to the liquidators or their power of agency, as well as the termination of the
association, are to be registered by the liquidators. The notification for registration of the
liquidators appointed by resolution of the general meeting must have attached to it a copy of
the appointing order, and the notification for registration of the power of agency which was
determined by way of derogation from section 48 (3), i on the passing of resolutions by the
liquidators must have attached to it a copy of the document containing this provision.
(3) Liquidators appointed by the court are entered in the register by the court of its own
motion.
Section 77
Parties obliged to notify and form of notification
The notifications for entry in the register of associations are to be submitted by members of
the board and by the liquidators, who are entitled to represent the association in this regard
by way of notarially certified statement. The submission may be submitted to the court in the
original or in a publicly-certified copy.
Section 78
Assessment of coercive fines
(1) The local court [Amtsgericht] may enjoin the members of the board to comply with the
provisions of section 67 (1), section 71 (1), section 72, section 74 (2), section 75 (2) and
section 76 by imposing coercive fines.
(2) In the same way, the liquidators may be enjoined to comply with the provisions of
section 76.
Section 79
Inspection of the register of associations
(1) Everyone is permitted to inspect the register of associations and the documents filed with
the local court [Amtsgericht] by the association. A copy of the entries may be required; on
request, the copy must be certified. If the register of associations is kept by computer, the
copy is replaced by a print-out and the certified copy by an official print-out.
(2) The introduction of a computerised procedure enabling the data to be transmitted from
electronic registers of associations by retrieval is admissible if it is guaranteed that
Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice and Consumer Protection
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze-im-internet.de
Page 13 of 438
1. the retrieval of data does not exceed the inspection permitted under
subsection (1) above and
2. the admissibility of the retrievals can be monitored on the basis of a log.
The Länder may specify a nationwide electronic information and communication system for
the proceedings.
(3) The user must be informed that he can use the data transmitted only for information
purposes. The competent agency must verify (e.g. by spot checks) whether there is
evidence that the inspection permitted under sentence 1 above has been exceeded or
transmitted data are being misused.
(4) The competent agency may exclude a user from taking part in the computerised retrieval
procedure if he endangers the functional reliability of the retrieval equipment, exceeds the
inspection permitted under subsection (3) sentence 1 above or abuses transmitted data; the
same applies in the case of imminent exceeding of the permissible inspection or imminent
abuse.
(5) The competent agency is the Land justice administration authority. The agency with local
jurisdiction is the Land justice administration authority within whose portfolio the competent
local court [Amtsgericht] falls. This provision on jurisdiction may be varied by statutory order
of the Land government. The Land government may transfer this authorisation to the Land
justice administration authority by statutory order. The Länder may also agree to the
jurisdiction being transferred to the competent agency of another Land.
Subtitle 2
Foundations
Section 80
Formation of a foundation having legal personality
(1) The creation of a foundation with legal personality requires an endowment transaction
and recognition of the foundation by the competent public authority of the Land in which the
foundation is to have its seat.
(2) A foundation is to be recognised as having legal personality if the endowment transaction
satisfies the requirements of section 81 (1) below, if the long-term and sustained
achievement of the object of the foundation appears guaranteed and if the object of the
foundation does not endanger the common good. In the case of a foundation which is
established for a specific period the assets of which are to be depleted in pursuing its
purpose (principal-depleting foundation), the ongoing performance of the object of the
foundation is to be deemed secured if the foundation is to exist for a period defined in the
endowment transaction which is at least ten years.
(3) Provisions of the Land legislation on church foundations are unaffected. The same
applies with the necessary modifications to foundations which Land legislation treats as
equivalent to church foundations.
Section 81
Endowment transaction
(1) A lifetime endowment transaction must be in writing. It must contain the binding
declaration by the founder that he will dedicate assets, which may also be intended for
depletion, to achieve an object specified by himself. The endowment transaction must give
the foundation a charter with provisions on
1. the name of the foundation,
2. the seat of the foundation,
3. the objects of the foundation,
4. the assets of the foundation,
Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice and Consumer Protection
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze-im-internet.de
Page 14 of 438
5. the composition of the foundation board.
If the endowment transaction does not satisfy the requirements of sentence 3 above and if
the founder is dead, section 83 sentences 2 to 4 apply with the necessary modifications.
(2) Until the foundation is recognised as having legal personality, the founder has a right to
revoke the endowment transaction. If an application has been made for recognition by the
competent public authority, the revocation may be declared only to that public authority. The
heir of the founder is not entitled to revoke the endowment transaction if the founder made
the application to the competent public authority, or, if the endowment transaction was
notarially recorded, the founder, at or after the notarial recording, instructed the notary to
make the application.
Section 82
Duty of founder to make transfers
If the foundation is recognised as having legal personality, the founder has a duty to transfer
to the foundation the assets promised in the endowment transaction. Rights that can be
transferred by contract of transfer pass to the foundation on recognition, unless the
endowment transaction indicates that the founder intended otherwise.
Section 83
Testamentary foundation
If the endowment transaction is a testamentary disposition, the probate court must inform the
competent public authority of this for the purpose of recognition, unless application is made
by the heir or the executor. If the endowment transaction does not satisfy the requirements
of section 81 (1) sentence 3, the foundation shall be given a charter or additions shall be
made to an incomplete charter by the competent public authority before recognition; when
this is done, the will of the founder is to be taken into account. The seat of a foundation,
unless otherwise provided, is the place where the management is carried out. In case of
doubt, the last residence of the founder within the country is deemed the seat.
Section 84
Recognition after the death of the founder
If the foundation is recognised as having legal personality only after the death of the founder,
then for the purpose of the endowment payments made by the founder it is deemed to have
come into existence before his death.
Section 85
Constitution of foundation
The constitution of a foundation, to the extent that it is not based on federal or Land
legislation, is determined by the endowment transaction.
Section 86
Application of law on associations
The provisions of sections 23 and 27 (3) and of sections 28 to 31a and section 42 apply with
the necessary modifications to foundations; but the provisions of section 26 (2) sentence 1,
of section 27 (3) and of section 28 apply only to the extent that the constitution, in particular
the administration of the foundation by a public authority, does not lead to a different
conclusion. The provisions of section 26 (2) sentence 2 sentence 2 and of section 29 do not
apply to foundations whose administration is conducted by a public authority.
Section 87
Change of objects; termination
(1) If the objects of the foundation have become impossible to fulfil, or if they endanger the
common good, the competent public authority may give the foundation another intended
purpose or terminate it.
(2) When the objects are altered, the intention of the founder should be taken into account,
and in particular, it should be ensured that the income of the foundation assets is maintained
Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice and Consumer Protection
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze-im-internet.de
Page 15 of 438
for the group of persons that it was meant to benefit, as intended by the founder. The public
authority may amend the constitution of the foundation to the extent that the alteration of the
objects requires this.
(3) Before the objects are altered and the constitution is changed, the board of the
foundation should be heard.
Section 88
Devolution of property
When the foundation ceases to exist, the property devolves on the persons specified in the
constitution. If no persons entitled are specified, the property devolves on the treasury of the
Land in which the foundation had its seat, or on another person entitled to receive under the
law of this Land. The provisions of sections 46 to 53 apply with the necessary modifications.
Subtitle 3
Legal persons under public law
Section 89
Liability for organs; insolvency
(1) The provision of section 31 applies with the necessary modifications to the treasury and
to corporations, foundations and institutions under public law.
(2) The same applies, to the extent that insolvency proceedings are admissible with regard
to corporations, foundations and institutions under public law, to the provision of section 42
(2).
Division 2
Things and animals
Section 90
Concept of the thing
Only corporeal objects are things as defined by law.
Section 90a
Animals
Animals are not things. They are protected by special statutes. They are governed by the
provisions that apply to things, with the necessary modifications, except insofar as otherwise
provided.
Section 91
Fungible things
Fungible things as defined by law are movable things that in business dealings are
customarily specified by number, measure or weight.
Section 92
Consumable things
(1) Consumable things as defined by law are movable things whose intended use consists in
consumption or in disposal.
(2) Movable things are also regarded as consumable if they are part of a warehouse store or
another aggregate of things whose intended use is the disposal of the individual things.
Section 93
Essential parts of a thing
Parts of a thing that cannot be separated without one or the other being destroyed or
undergoing a change of nature (essential parts) cannot be the subject of separate rights.
Section 94
Essential parts of a plot of land or a building
(1) The essential parts of a plot of land include the things firmly attached to the land, in
particular buildings, and the produce of the plot of land, as long as it is connected with the
Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice and Consumer Protection
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze-im-internet.de
Page 16 of 438
land. Seed becomes an essential part of the plot of land when it is sown, and a plant when it
is planted.
(2) The essential parts of a building include the things inserted in order to construct the
building.
Section 95
Merely temporary purpose
(1) The parts of a plot of land do not include things that are connected with the land only for
a temporary purpose. The same applies to a building or other structure that is connected
with a plot of land belonging to another by a person exercising a right over that land.
(2) Things that are inserted into a building for a temporary purpose are not parts of the
building.
Section 96
Rights as parts of a plot of land
Rights that are connected with the ownership of a plot of land are regarded as parts of the
plot of land.
Section 97
Accessories
(1) Accessories are movable things that, without being parts of the main thing, are intended
to serve the economic purpose of the main thing and are in a spatial relationship to it that
corresponds to this intention. A thing is not an accessory if it is not regarded as an accessory
in business dealings.
(2) The temporary use of a thing for the economic purpose of another thing does not give it
the quality of an accessory. The temporary separation of an accessory from the main thing
does not deprive it of the quality of an accessory.
Section 98
Commercial and agricultural inventory
The following are intended to serve the economic purpose of the main thing:
1. in the case of a building that is permanently equipped for commercial
operations, in particular a mill, a smithy, a brewery or a factory, the machinery and other
equipment intended for the business,
2. in the case of a farm, the equipment and livestock intended for the commercial
operations, the agricultural produce, to the extent that it is necessary to continue the
farming until the time when it is expected that the same or similar produce will be
obtained, and manure produced on the farm.
Section 99
Fruits
(1) Fruits of a thing are the products of the thing and the other yield obtained from the thing
in accordance with its intended use.
(2) Fruits of a right are the proceeds that the right produces in accordance with its intended
use, in particular, in the case of a right to extract component parts of the soil, the parts
extracted.
(3) Fruits are also the proceeds supplied by a thing or a right by virtue of a legal relationship.
Section 100
Emoluments
Emoluments are the fruits of a thing or of a right and the benefits that the use of the thing or
the right affords.